MAJOR CHANGES AT THE ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATIONCambridge, Massachusettseff@eff.orgWednesday, January 13, 1993The Electronic Frontier Foundation was founded in July, 1990 to assurefreedom of expression in digital media, with a particular emphasis onapplying the principles embodied in the Constitution and the Bill of Rightsto computer-based communication.EFF has met many of those challenges. We have defended civil liberties incourt. We have shaped the policy debate on emerging communicationsinfrastructure and regulation. We have increased awareness both on the Netand among those law enforcement officials, policy makers, and corporationswhose insufficient understanding of the digital environment threatened thefreedom of Cyberspace.But we've found that Cyberspace is huge. It extends not only beyondconstitutional jurisdiction but to the very limits of imagination. Toexplore and understand all the new social and legal phenomena thatcomputerized media make possible is a task which grows faster than it canbe done.Maintaining an office in Cambridge and another in Washington DC, has beenexpensive, logistically difficult, and politically painful. Many functionswere duplicated. The two offices began to diverge philosophically andculturally. We had more good ideas than efficient means for carrying themout. And an unreasonable share of leadership and work fell on one of ourfounders, Mitch Kapor.These kinds of problems are common among fast-growing technology startupsin their early years, but we recognize that we have not always dealt withthem gracefully. Further, we didn't respond convincingly to those who beganto believe that EFF had lost sight of its founding vision.Against that background, the EFF Board met in Cambridge on January 7, 8,and 9 to revisit EFF's mission, set priorities for the Foundation's futureactivities, adopt a new structure and staff to carry them out, and clarifyits relationship to others outside the organization.1. EFF'S CAMBRIDGE OFFICE WILL CLOSE.We will be shutting down our original Cambridge office over the next sixmonths, and moving all of EFF's staff functions to our office inWashington.2. JERRY BERMAN HAS BEEN NAMED EFF'S EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR In December, we announced that Mitch Kapor would be leaving the job ofExecutive Director. He wanted to devote more time and energy to specificEFF projects, such as The Open Platform Initiative, focusing less onadministrative details and more on EFF's strategic vision. We also saidthat we would conduct a search for his replacement, appointing Jerry Bermanas our Interim Director. Jerry's appointment is now permanent, and thesearch is terminated.3. CLIFF FIGALLO WILL MAINTAIN EFF'S PRESENCE ON-LINE, AND WILL DIRECT THE   TRANSITION PROCESS.Cambridge Office Director Cliff Figallo will manage the EFF transitionprocess, working out of Cambridge. He is now considering a move toWashington for organizational functions yet to be defined. In the meantime,he will oversee our on-line presence and assure electronic accessibility.4. STAFF COUNSEL MIKE GODWIN'S ROLE TO BE DETERMINED We recognize the enormous resource represented by Mike Godwin. He probablyknows more about the forming Law of Cyberspace than anyone, but differencesof style and agenda created an impasse which left us little choice but toremove him from his current position. EFF is committed to continuing theservices he has provided. We will discuss with him a new relationship whichwould make it possible for him to continue providing them.5. COMMUNICATIONS STAFFERS GERARD VAN DER LEUN AND RITA ROUVALIS WILL LEAVE   EFF.Despite the departure of the Cambridge communications staff, we expect tocontinue publishing EFFector Online on schedule as well as maintaining ourusual presence online. Both functions will be under the direction of CliffFigallo, who will be assisted by members of the Board and Washington staff.6. JOHN PERRY BARLOW WILL ASSUME A GREATER LEADERSHIP ROLE. John will replace Mitch Kapor as Chairman of EFF's Executive Committee,which works closely with the Executive Director to manage day to dayoperations. Mitch will remain as Board Chairman of EFF. All of thedirectors have committed themselves to a more active role in EFF so thatdecisions can be made responsively during this transition.7. EFF WILL NOT SPONSOR LOCAL CHAPTERS, BUT WILL WORK CLOSELY WITH   INDEPENDENT REGIONAL GROUPS.We have labored mightily and long over the whole concept of chapters, but,in the end, the Board has decided not to form EFF chapters. Instead, EFFwill encourage the development of independent local organizations concernedwith Electronic Frontier issues. Such groups will be free to use the phrase"Electronic Frontier" in their names (e.g., Omaha Electronic FrontierOutpost), with the understanding that no obligation, formal or informal, isimplied in either direction between independent groups and EFF. While EFFand any local groups that proliferate will remain organizationallyindependent and autonomous, we hope to work closely with them in pursuit ofshared goals. The EFF Board still plans to meet with representatives ofregional groups in Atlanta next week to discuss ideas for futurecooperation.8. WE CLARIFIED EFF'S MISSION AND ACTIVITIES In undertaking these changes, the board is guided by the sense that ourmission is to understand the opportunities and challenges of digitalcommunications to foster openness, individual freedom, and community.We expect to carry out our mission through activities in the following areas: POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND ADVOCACY. EFF has been working to promote an openarchitecture for telecommunications by various means, including the OpenPlatform Initiative, the fight against the FBI's Digital Telephony wiretapproposal, and efforts to free robust encryption from NSA control.FOSTERING COMMUNITY. Much of the work we have done in the Cambridge officehas been directed at fostering a sense of community in the online world.These efforts will continue. We have realized that we know far less aboutthe conditions conducive to the formation of virtual communities than isnecessary to be effective in creating them. Therefore, we will devote alarge portion of our R & D resources to developing better understanding inthis area.LEGAL SERVICES. We were born to defend the rights of computer users againstover-zealous and uninformed law enforcement officials. This will continueto be an important focus of EFF's work. We expect to improve our legalarchiving and dissemination while continuing to provide legal informationto individuals who request it, and support for attorneys who arelitigating. Both the board and staff will go on writing and speaking aboutthese issues. Our continuing suit on behalf of Steve Jackson Games isunaffected by these changes.RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT. We have started many projects over the years astheir need became apparent. Going forward, EFF will allocate resources toinvestigating and initiating new projects. To ensure that our projects havethe greatest impact and can reasonably be completed with the resourcesavailable, EFF will sharpen its selection and review process.IN CONCLUSION...We expect that the foregoing may not sit well with many on the Net. We maybe accused of having "sold out" our bohemian birthright for a mess ofWashingtonian pottage. It may be widely, and perhaps hotly, asserted thatthe "suits" have won and that EFF is about to become another handmaiden tothe large corporate interests which support our work on telecommunicationspolicy.However plausible, these conclusions are wrong. We made these choices withmany of the same misgivings our members will feel. We have toiled for manymonths to restore harmony between our two offices. But in some cases,personal animosities had grown bitter. It seems clear that much of thedifficulty was structural. We believe that our decisions will go far tofocus EFF's work and make it more effective. The decision to locate our oneoffice in Washington was unavoidable; our policy work can only be doneeffectively there.Given the choice to centralize in Washington, the decision to permanentlyappoint Jerry Berman as our Executive Director was natural. Jerry has, in avery short time, built an extremely effective team there, so our confidencein his managerial abilities is high. But we are also convinced of hiscommitment to and growing understanding of the EFF programs which extendbeyond the policy establishment in Fortress Washington.We recognize that inside the Beltway there lies a very powerful realitydistortion field, but we have a great deal of faith in the ability of theonline world to keep us honest. We know that we can't succeed in insightfulpolicy work without a deep and current understanding of the networks asthey evolve -- technically, culturally, and personally.To those who believe that we've become too corporate, we can only say thatwe founded EFF because we didn't feel that large, formal organizationscould be trusted with the future of Cyberspace. We have no intention ofbecoming one ourselves.Some will read between these lines and draw the conclusion that Mitch Kaporis withdrawing from EFF. That is absolutely not the case. Mitch remainsthoroughly committed to serving EFF's agenda. We believe however, that hisenergies are better devoted to strategy and to developing a compellingvision of future human communications than in day to day management.The difficult decision to reject direct chapter affiliation was based on abelief that no organization which believes so strongly inself-determination should be giving orders or taking them. Nevertheless, weare eager to see the development of many outposts on the ElectronicFrontier, whether or not they agree with us or one another on everyparticular. After all, EFF is about the preservation of diversity.This has been a hard passage. We have had to fire good friends, and this ispersonally painful to us. We are deeply concerned that, in moving toWashington, EFF is in peril for its soul. But we are also convinced that wehave made the best decisions possible under the circumstances, and that EFFwill be stronger as a result. Please cut us some slack during thetransition. And please tell us (either collectively at eff@eff.org orindividually at the addresses below) when we aren't meeting yourexpectations. In detail and with examples. We don't promise to fixeverything, but we are interested in listening and working on the issuesthat affect us all.The Board of Directors of the Electronic Frontier Foundation Mitch Kapor, mkapor@eff.orgJohn Perry Barlow, barlow@eff.orgJohn Gilmore, gnu@toad.comStewart Brand, sbb@well.sf.ca.usEsther Dyson, edyson@mcimail.comDave Farber, farber@cis.upenn.eduJerry Berman, jberman@eff.orgCliff Figallo, fig@eff.org